I'm going to have to borrow a couple of quarters from you
I'm a doctoral student at UC Berkeley in the Geography Department.
I'm E-R-A-Y, right?
G-R-A-Y.
B-R-E-C-H-I-N.
That's me.
Okay, good.
And I was a...
I was a journalist and a TV producer in San Francisco in the 1980s when the new library was being planned.
And I was a writer of that one.
Oh, thanks very much.
And I just want to say before we start that it's great that you've said this because as you get into this, as James Chakey says when— Sure, a little bit.
When we first started into all this, Chafee said at a coffee that we were having that, you know, you get into this and it will consume you.
And in fact, it did.
It consumed many of us because you need a reality check every once in a while because you can't believe that this is actually happening.
You know, it seems so surreal.
And one of the strangest things that happened was, and this is what we were just talking about, the analogy we made, is that
In Nick's talk, he subtly makes the analogy of sending books off to the dump to what happened to Jews during the war.
It's somewhat subtle.
It had been given to him by the librarians in the San Francisco public.
So a letter went out, and I guess you haven't seen this letter, but in the attempt to destroy Nick, Nick's reputation, after the May 30th talk at the library.
May 30th, 96th.
Yeah, 96th, a great talk.
And also about that time, a branch librarian named Colba Singer in San Francisco wrote a scathing editorial in The Examiner, an op-ed piece, about how the new main library showed how the whole system was being commercialized and how it had betrayed the trust of the people.
Shortly after that, I think it was in June,
A three-page single-spaced letter went out from the Library Foundation, signed without letterhead, signed by eight members of the Library Foundation, accusing Toba of homophobia and accusing Nick because of his analogy of anti-Semitism.
and anti-Semitism because he had dared to make this analogy and that it had, I guess, belittled the Holocaust by making that analogy.
To this day, nobody knows who wrote that letter.
It went out through official channels to all librarians in the system without letter here.
I'm almost certain myself that it was Steve Coulter who wrote that letter.
Because it's the same identity politics that he uses to divide people.
That's great.
Identity politics.
I was looking for a description.
Because this is all Utah.
I'll tell you a little bit.
He sticks with the women, by the way.
I gave him a chance to modify his description there.
Well, no, no, it's true.
I mean, because it's so strange to watch him do this as head of the Library Commission because it's so divisive and at the same time he's posing as a
San Francisco liberal, and yet he's making these incredibly racist and divisive statements.
And that's not what the library is about.
The library, obviously, should be inclusive.
And so really, it's an amazing twist of logic.
But they've been doing this for quite some time.
That was the first attempt to destroy Nick, his reputation.
The other ones that happened were before his article came out in the New Yorker.
Our catalog story of the second one.
The second one.
They knew it was coming out.
I didn't realize that they had, in fact, contacted the New Yorker.
But meanwhile, back in San Francisco, they launched a preemptive campaign against Baker, accusing him of being an opportunist, an out-of-towner who would come to the city to make money and make a name for himself.
There were letters to the editor, which is really funny.
Which is funny.
Oh, yeah.
The man makes his living as a novelist.
Sure.
As well, I'm sure.
Let's see.
What was... Oh, yes.
There's nobody hotter than Nick Baker right now, by the way.
That's good to know.
Well, I mean, and that's why it was such a brave thing for him to do, to go out on this limb.
And for Tilly Olsen, too, because one thing that has disappointed me about the local writing community is they're the only well-known writers who ain't shocked and spoken out.
There are a number of other people who could have done so, but they didn't.
Amy Tam... Do you?
I'm curious to see what... Oh, Isabelle Allende.
She was about peace involved.
She wrote it forward.
the history of the library.
And she's quoted, they interviewed her in the tape that T.Q.E.D.
did.
She talks about how inclusive the thing is.
Well, sure, there are these affinity rooms that are really money.
I mean, they're pretty, you know, but what the hell is in there?
And you're really allowing the course of intellectual inquiry to be determined by whoever is willing to put up X amount of dollars to establish them.
Well, I think the main thing is that some of them are pretty.
you know gays and lesbians won because they gave more money and so you go from there to the adjacent room which is the black american room um gays gave over three million dollars um blacks gave only about half a million so there's not even a sign i believe the last time i was there there wasn't even a sign that identified that as the african-american i did not see no no it's just like a reading room but the most important thing is that there are no librarians
In any of those rooms, there's an expensive desk and a chair with a sign that says, if you need help, go and find a librarian.
But there's no specialized librarian.
For people who are doing gay and lesbian research, you know, in San Francisco, that's important.
They've got a good collection.
There's nobody there to help them.
There was supposed to be Jim Van Buster, who largely put together that collection this year yesterday.
They should have been the curator of that collection, but that's shameful for a collection which has been endowed with over $3 million.
They don't even have a specialized librarian to help either.
that none of the well-known writers except Nick and Tilly have spoken out on this issue.
And it may just be that they are, like I was, embarrassed when they found out about the good result.
But then that would be, should be, I think, even more of a reason that they should have spoken out about this betrayal.
Because it was a betrayal of everything that we extensively believed in.
Would you say you're involved in the struggle?
I don't know what else to call it.
Are you an observer?
Tell me.
Well, of course, you gave a speech.
You were on the endocrine, as they might say, in boxing.
Nick was the main event that you were on the endocrine.
With sort of his backbeat, taking off.
Oh.
But it was a privilege to do that.
You have a text of what you said, right?
You have a text of what you said.
Oh, it's right here.
Yeah.
So, well, my role in this actually began in 1985 when I was writing for Focus Magazine in San Francisco.
I had a regular column in Focus called Cityscapes.
which was mostly urban design criticism, but I saw a letter to the editor and the examiner that said, why are we spending so, why is Diane Feinstein, mayor, spending so much money trying to get a major sports team, a sports stadium in San Francisco, in the main library, that's falling apart to disgrace for a major world-class city, which is going to still like to think of itself as being, well, I took that as a,
to write a column about the need for a new library.
And Feinstein was furious from what I hear.
So he immediately called up the library and asked who had put me up to this.
And in the library, nobody really knew who I was.
It was just this columnist.
So it apparently hit some sort of target.
And so then the people who were
We became very good friends.
I became a major proponent of the main library.
I gave a talk, which is also in here, to the Friends of the Public Library about why we needed it and particularly about the kind of building that it should be.
So we were all in love with each other, and I went to parties that they gave.
Was Kevin Starr in place at this point?
Oh, no, he was long gone.
He was good, because he was not fair.
That's right.
But I had no contact with Kevin Starr.
I was sort of doing this on my own and then with them.
So I wrote, at Marjorie Stern's suggestion, I wrote another column in 1987, just before the election, about how we needed the new main library and why.
And so the bond measure passed.
We had a big celebration that night.
Pacific Heights Mansion, lots of wine.
And then I thought it was sort of taken care of.
Now, I've got to say that I have no reservations because Marjorie had said to me at some time, if only we could get Barton Gregorian to the library.
Of course, lots of luck.
Yeah, I mean, you know.
I didn't use Barton for this book.
Oh, great.
Okay.
That's wonderful.
Well, just before you were leaving Brown to go to New York for it.
He's now heading up for Carnegie.
Did you know that?
No.
He left Brown University to name the new head of the Carnegie Corporation.
Carnegie builds all the libraries.
You'll be happy about that.
It's a new challenge.
I mean, I couldn't help make the connection between the comparison
of Gregorian stature, who was a true scholar, a book lover and everything, with this man whom I met.
Then they brought in Ken Dowland, because Dowland was so clearly,
It was clear that he was illiterate.
What makes that clear?
When you talk to him, he hadn't read books.
They had a junket, I believe, and a few others, Marjorie Stern.
They went to Europe to look at new libraries with Fried, the architect.
Kathy Simon, Dowling, and one of the people who was on that junket said on the way back, she sort of jokingly said to me, do you know what he was reading?
And I said, no.
He said, read his digest and then he was.
Yes, that's what he read.
And his office, from what I hear, had not a book in it.
There was just a very spare space with two laptops.
Well, it's ready to go in his house tonight.
I'm going to ask him his library.
Good.
Good idea.
Yeah, absolutely.
Because he went into a, somebody I know's class, and he said, oh, you've got too many books here.
You know, he sort of made a disparaging remark about the books.
So it was very clear that this man, he was a technologist.
Well, he just, you know, he was not a book person.
So I had a misgivings about this guy.
But clearly he was brought on to, who got him?
Marjorie Stern, I believe, had a lot to do with it, but I'm sure Steve Coulter had a major will.
But Coulter wasn't in place.
Coulter was Library Commissioner and wasn't in background.
He left for a while under the Jordan administration.
That Library Commissioner was thrown out and another one came in and then Brown brought him back.
Yeah, because Coulter was wine and dining at this time.
I would double check on that.
Sure.
Absolutely.
But I think that how did you come to the San Francisco club?
Yeah.
Because I'd sure like, you know, I mean, this man was so clearly not a book person.
But I never had any idea that he would do what he did.
I didn't realize that he would actually have a vendetta against books.
Are you convinced that he does?
I believe he does, yeah.
I mean, I think that I've now run into enough of these technoids to realize that they really do
believe that the book is a thing of the past, that it is an anachronism, an obsolete form of technology.
When you talk of Darwin, you see he is imbued with this sense of mission.
which probably is sincere, actually.
He believes that he sees the future and he's going to take us there.
Do you see the future, Mr. Bell?
Do you believe he's in the future?
Okay, I'm sorry.
I'm formulating an interview while I'm talking.
You imagine that, particularly after watching his resignation speech,
The constant repetition of vision and visionary by Tim Dowling and by those people who supported him, like Art Agnes, for example, is that old line, if you repeat a lie long enough, people will come to believe it.
This man is so clearly not a visionary.
I mean, he's so lacking in charisma or anything.
How can you actually convince people that you are a fear?
Well, I think that we've always, every culture has a need for suit sales.
And so he fills that world, and that he's a techno-zeller.
And unfortunately, that's what's largely taking over in the world of librarianship.
I mean, that's what's happening in the schools of librarianship everywhere, and that's what's so frightening about it.
Anyway, to get back to it, so what happened then?
Oh, yeah.
The library was going up.
As it went up, as the skin went up, I was more and more dismayed, because the outside, I think, is so appallingly bad.
It's really illiterate, Mozart classicism.
What kind of classicism?
Mozart, Mozart, yeah.
It was just bad on the outside.
And Diane Filippi said, she was obviously, when I talked to her,
She was a little bit nervous about the outside, but she said, you'll love the inside.
And this is Diane Filippi, who is.
Diane Filippi was president of the Friends of the Public Library.
She was a very good friend of mine.
She also is, I believe, the business manager for Kathy Simon's firm.
Is Kathy Simon easy to get on the phone?
I think so, yeah.
If you look in the phone book, she might not be under Marjorie.
Her husband's name was... What is it?
Oh, I can't remember.
S-T-E-L-E, right?
No E. No E.
Well, which street does she live on?
She lives on, I believe it's Lombard Street.
It might, unless she has that option not to use that.
Carl, Carl Stern.
C-A-R-L.
I think she goes under that name.
And Margie's a really interesting person.
I really liked her a lot.
I think I have to talk to her.
Yeah.
I mean, it would break my heart if I was in her position.
And I'd like to talk to Kathy Simon.
She did the interior.
What the hell did she have in her life?
Did she study libraries?
Did she study libraries and services?
Do you know what I'm saying?
Just to ask her.
I don't think that she did.
She explained it from that.
She and Anne Freed on the PQED tape.
And it's just so intellectualized.
with the building, and it was largely my friend Lyra Curlamba, the architect, who was sane all along as the planning process was going on.
What's his name?
K-U-R-L-A-M-D-R-B-E-R.
Maybe he's going to be actually.
I think you should.
or critically, our colleagues were.
But Ira was sort of, I think, a brave position.
Probably.
Oh, yes.
Uh-huh.
And he was, it almost broke up our friendship because I wanted the library so badly.
But he kept saying, this library isn't going to work.
It's a mess.
Wow.
Well, did she ever do anything?
Oh, they hated him.
because he was so outspoken.
And finally there was a picture of the library in the San Francisco Independent.
And I was giving a talk to about 600 people in Herbst Theatre around that time, just before they started construction.
And somebody asked me from the audience, what do you think of the new main library?
And I had to sort of pause, and then I said, well, I was all for it, but I'd just seen the picture, and it looks like a disaster.
I'm really sorry.
It's probably too late to change it.
oh that was on saturday on monday morning at nine o'clock i had a call from cappy simon's firm saying that they had made changes on it and invited me down to see the model and i said you can't have made that many changes on it you know specifically was it was these aesthetic problems that you had or were they functional well it was mostly aesthetic i'd seen the outside but i'd also seen the plan and i was just sort of
I was so confused by the plan.
I was such a mess of every floor, different with this diagonal slashing through it, and it had no clarity to it, and so I had misgivings about that, too.
Mostly it was aesthetics at that point.
But, I mean, I never could imagine that they simply wouldn't plan for the capacity of the World Library, because that would be the content of being the plan.
I said, with all due respect, when you lost that floor, why couldn't you have modified the space that was in age for shelves?
I mean, you know, this is a library.
Actually, it's a beautiful building, but where are the books?
That's my reaction when I go in.
Very pretty, but can't make quite.
Remember that line from the dirty desk?
Where are the books?
So they took away a floor from the British Library, so they cut back in the auditorium.
But they still made room for the books.
Why not?
And they said, well, we don't want it to be, we talked about walking in, we didn't want it to be lifeless.
So we're talking about a monument to anything but books.
What it's really about is about creating spaces that photograph well in the architectural magazines.
It won prizes in architectural magazines.
I think the AIA Journal.
Basically, a building like that is to win prizes for the architectural firm so that they can build other ones.
In fact, Simon's firm is now specializing in libraries.
And I was meaning to write the AI journal to say, do you ever check out a building for its functionality?
That is an important aspect of architecture after all.
Captain Simon, do you know the name of the firm on the top of your head?
It's Simon Markins.
Simon Thomas Markins.
Where's his name?
Yes.
Simon et cetera.
Right.
He looks like a lawyer's firm.
I do.
In fact, I've got to be over at the bank bus at 10-15.
Oh, okay.
Well, I'll just finish.
I mean, I'll run.
Wait, thanks a lot.
Are you going to come right back?
Yeah.
Okay, I'll just wrap this up.
I need a lot of stuff.
So, what happened was in early 96, just before the library opened.
Everybody was getting excited and anticipating this, and KQED Radio has a morning talk show
And they asked me to come in with Ken Dallin and what's his name from Stanford?
Mike Keller.
And Nick Baker, who is so controversial, was going to call in from somewhere out there.
And obviously, Nick and I were to represent the Luddite side.
They were representing technological progress in the future.
That was got to be a pretty nasty interview.
Contentious.
You know, I wasn't really all that committed at that time.
I hadn't seen the library, but I believe in books.
And it was pretty clear these guys didn't believe in books.
They believed in technology.
At one point, I did say, they asked me what I thought about the library, and I said, for the outside, get literate.
I haven't seen the inside.
I'm hoping better for that.
And Gowen looked at me with contempt and said,
You just say that because you're ignorant.
He called me ignorant and I thought
Insecure as I may be.
I've been told a lot of things, but when it comes to architecture, I'm not ignorant.
You are an architecture critic, by the way.
I was, yeah, at that time.
I'm an environmental historian now.
Without having to go through your ACs at this point, is this something you can send me a retail or something like that?
Sure.
You mentioned you have some books being published.
I like that.
Sure.
But I don't need to do this right now.
Are you going to be available at some point today or tomorrow evening?
Sure.
Coming back, he goes to Peter Howard at Serendipity.
Oh, good.
Oh, sure.
Oh, that's a great bookstore.
Oh, it's wonderful.
Peter's one of the great booksellers.
Yeah.
I'm writing a chapter in European, a European bookseller scholar.
People who understand books, research books, books are living things.
You'll get completely lost in that place.
And it's only the surface, because you've got warehouses behind it.
I've written about Peter.
Peter's my general name.
Oh, okay.
Anyway, so we were sort of the loggerheads on that.
Nick, I didn't realize that.
At some point he stopped.
talking, and I didn't realize he'd gotten so angry he'd pulled the phone out of the wall.
I wasn't that angry.
I was being actually too polite.
That was just a few weeks, I believe, before Nick and I gave this talk, and that was the first time I'd met Nick, so this is after the formal opening of
I think the library was just coming out because I still hadn't been inside the library.
It opened in April.
The May talk was the month after the opening.
Right.
I think this was just shortly before the thing opened.
Everything's in place.
Yeah.
Because I know people had already taken press tours through the library.
I haven't seen it.
I think probably the first time I was in the library was for the May 30th talk.
No, I had actually been in there before.
And again, I had some misgivings, but nothing like
when I heard Nick talk and heard it explain what was happening.
And my jaw was literally, it just fell.
I just couldn't believe it, what he was saying.
I don't think anybody in the audience could either.
Do you have any copies of some of the pieces that you wrote?
Oh, yeah, they're all here.
I have them here.
I brought them all.
See, a journalist knows that.
I did find the archive notes.
Oh, yeah, let me just finish this.
I was so angry at what Nick said, and talking with him afterwards, and the librarians who had told him about this stuff,
But I wrote a letter to the editor, which was published in the Chronicle, and it basically slammed Dalton.
It said, largely, compressed what Nick had said, that these books had been disclosed of because the new library was small and Dalton was to blame for it.
Ben called me up that morning and said, you have not made Mr. Dalton's day.
He wrote back a response to mine, which is a rather stupid letter, but it was in that letter that he said that this was not a research library.
He lived to regret that, actually.
Gina reiterated that yesterday.
Did she?
Well, it all depends on what you mean by a research library.
It's not the bandwagon.
Oh, you did?
What did you do?
Oh, wow.
You used the San Francisco Public for research.
That's an interesting disclosure for you, isn't it?
Oh, very.
I mean, because the San Francisco History Room is one of the first places I was headed for doing research.
She said, other than San Francisco history and maybe gay, lesbian, you know, which is what they call it.
And there are collection development offices of every major, you know,
Okay, so that's when Dowland made that statement, and that has echoed down the years since then, because this is not what people voted for.
You know, a $110 million bond issue, if they had been told that back then, I'm sure that bond issue would not have passed.
The morning that that ran, I was in cold sweat because I thought I had gone out on a limb myself.
I was taking Nick Baker's word for it.
Then I had put this out in front of the Bay Area, in Northern California.
I called up Nick.
I said, Nick, I'm really worried that I've wronged Ken Dowland.
He said, look, I thought the same thing myself.
He said,
I've checked everything out.
It all worked well.
You stated exactly what has happened.
And in fact, that happened to be the case.
As I got more and more into it, what was happening, I wrote a query to find out if this was happening at other libraries around the country through a listserv back in Amherst, Richard Slurk's listserv.
He'd asked me to put it on.
and explained a bit about what was happening at the San Francisco public.
Within a couple of days, I had gone to the library of Listservs all over the world.
I started getting clicks from all over the world.
Again, I went into a cold sweat because I didn't know that the internet works that way, and the black-naked nuclear missiles, you can't pull it back when it's out there.
But again, I felt that I had long down.
I really, by putting this out there,
But I just got an enormous number of things from people.
It was a very interesting discussion about what's happening.
Did you copy all this?
Yeah, it's all in my archives.
I've got the hit that came in from Colorado that said that this librarian experienced with Dowling as a teacher at the University of Colorado.
It didn't take a Nostradamus to tell what happened when he got his hands on a major public library.
Is this something you can give to me?
Is this something you can get to me?
Oh yeah, I forgot to bring it to you.
But I can get you all that stuff.
It's all in my archives.
I'm going to run.
Are you going to be around later today?
Sure.
Are you at your phone number?
I'm going home right now.
I've got to do this Berkeley stuff.
This is totally apart from San Francisco.
There's things going on over there, as you realize.
Very interesting.
I'd like to talk more about that.
I would like to say, though, before we stop,
I've been a real embarrassment for the library administration because they've attacked Nick.
They've attacked Toby Singer.
They never really attacked me.
I think that's because I was so closely identified with getting the library built.
Jim Haas, who has spared nothing to attack Nick Baker, once said that, you know, they should put my name over a door at least.
Jim Haas, H-A-S.
Haas is...
a lawyer in San Francisco who has been behind the Civic Center restoration.
He was one of the major figures in launching this preemptive strike against Nick Baker before his article came out in The New Yorker.
They accused him of being an out of town or an opportunist and everything.
I think very good about Jim Haas.
Anyway, so I'm in this peculiar position because I was so closely identified with getting the building built and then turned against it.
And Coulter, from what I've heard, Coulter feels that I am a traitor.
Your name didn't come up at all.
Well, I haven't been going to library commission meetings.
I mean, even the name that he's torn up that I'm seeing, yours didn't come up.
That's interesting, yeah.
yeah um they don't really quite know how to deal with them because they have a great deal of respect for me and turning against them and being public about it is the last thing that they expected so i know you are you californian yeah i'm a san francisco historian so they can't accuse you of you
No, I'm spared that.
You know, he's coming in from, you know, central Massachusetts, you know, trying to make a name for himself.
It's part of the provincialism of San Francisco, which likes to claim itself to be a sophisticated world-class city, but in fact, it's often just shockingly provincial.
It could be like a country club here.
When they want to pull up the job ridges, they can't.
It's stupid.
Do you have to continue?
Sure.
Just give me a call.
I've got to go.